Use simple language.
Flesch-Kincaid

Please use simple language, short phrases.
 
To estimate readability of your text you can use the Flesch-Kincaid formula.
MS Word has its own built-in mechanism
Google for: Flesch-Kincaid MS Word

You will find many instructions on how to do it in MS Word.

Alternatively you can copy/paste text into this online form:

- http://www.online-utility.org/english/readability_test_and_improve.jsp 

It gives you score like this:

90 – 100 easily understood by an average 11-year old student
60 – 70 easily understood by 13-15 year old students
0 – 30 best understood by university graduates
 
You need to get your score to 70 – or even higher.

================================================================
Read this article:
 - https://www.awai.com/2007/12/clarity-of-your-writing/

How to Improve the Clarity of Your Writing
By Michael Masterson

How to Consistently Score 8.5 or Below
on the Flesch-Kincaid Grading Scale

In most areas of life, getting high grades means you
are doing well. When it comes to writing, however, the
most popular grading system works inversely.

The Flesch-Kincaid (FK) scale is a statistical program
designed to measure simplicity of expression.
Simplicity of expression, some publishers believe, is
an important quality of good writing.

I am a big proponent of simplicity of expression. And
I’ve been recommending the FK to fellow writers and
publishing clients for many years as a useful tool to
achieve simplicity. Early to Rise requires its written
submissions to be graded on the FK scale. And
Stansberry & Associates uses it for all its
promotional copy.

The FK program calculates the average number of words
per sentence, the average number of syllables per
sentence, and the frequency of passive and complex
constructions.

Most magazine and newspaper writing falls between
grade levels 8.0 and 12.0. Academic and scientific
text is generally in the 10.0 to 14.0 range. Dialog
tends to be graded at the 4.0 to 6.0 levels. The text
you have been reading in this article so far, for
example, has an FK score of 10.2.

A grade level close to 11 is considered moderately
difficult to understand. Some writers feel “moderately
difficult” is perfectly okay. But I don’t want my
writing to be moderately difficult. I want it to be
easy to understand. An FK score of 7.0 to 8.5 is my
goal.

But does that make any sense? Is it reasonable to want
to achieve a low FK grade for every essay I write?
Shouldn’t some essays – those that express more
complex thoughts – have higher FK grades?

Can you really bring down the FK score without also
bringing down the quality of the copy?

The short answer is yes.

Yes, you can get your FK scores into the 7.0 to 8.5
range even if your copy is full of big, beautiful
ideas. Not only will your ideas be preserved, they
might even be improved by the simplicity.

Let me prove it to you. Let me rewrite this article
using a few of the tricks I’ve learned about good
writing. Let’s see if I can get it down to 8.5 or
below. Are you ready? Here goes:

================================================
Take Two!

How to Consistently Score 8.5 or Below
on the Flesch-Kincaid Grading Scale

Steve Sjuggerud’s investment newsletter, True Wealth,
has 70,000 subscribers – one of the highest
circulations in the industry. It also has one of the
highest renewal rates at more than 75%. Steve’s e-zine
gets super-high open rates. And when he publishes a
new report, his readers buy it in droves. By every
standard of measurement, Steve is a very successful
writer.

What’s his secret? At a writing seminar in France last
summer, he explained it:

“When I started writing, Michael told me I had to
learn to write more simply. He told me that successful
writers have two skills: coming up with good ideas and
expressing them clearly. I agreed with him about good
ideas.

“But I wasn’t sure that writing simply is that
important. So I conducted a secret study. I scanned
all of Agora’s writers and rated them on the grading
scale Michael recommended. What I discovered surprised
me. There was a direct relationship between simplicity
and success. The writers who had the lowest Flesch-
Kincaid scores had the highest renewal rates.

“In fact, the three most successful writers all had
the lowest FK grades. I decided Michael was right. I
started using the program to simplify my writing. It
was difficult. But gradually it became easy, almost
automatic. I am convinced that the reason True Wealth
has 70,000 readers today is because it is so easy to
read.”

Steve is not the only successful writer who believes
in simplicity. Michael Palmer, who heads up Agora’s
most successful copywriting team, insists that all his
writers keep their FK scores below 8.0. That’s been
the standard for The Golden Thread and Early to Rise
recently, and it’s becoming a standard throughout
Agora.

Simplicity of expression is not the most important
quality of good writing. Content ranks first. If you
want to be a good writer, the most important thing to
do is present your reader with good thinking. If your
thoughts have quality, your writing will too.

But if you express your good thoughts in a complex or
clumsy way, you make it difficult for your readers to
grasp them. Good ideas have the greatest impact when
they are expressed simply and directly. A good
thought, like a beautiful woman, should not be cloaked
in a bundle of rags.

The best tool I’ve found to measure simplicity is the
Flesch-Kincaid grading scale. Flesch-Kincaid
calculates the average number of words per sentence,
the average number of syllables per sentence, and the
frequency of passive and complex constructions.

Most magazine and newspaper writing falls between
grade levels 8.0 and 12.0. Academic and scientific
text is generally in the 10.0 to 14.0 range. Dialog
tends to be graded at the 4 to 6 levels. The text you
have been reading so far in this rewritten article,
for example, achieves a grade of 7.8.

Does that surprise you?

In less than 10 minutes, I was able to reduce my score
from 10.2 to 7.8. You’ve just read what I did. None of
the details were sacrificed. Nor was the main idea. In
fact, my second effort is stronger. Don’t you think?

I’ve had lots of conversations with writers about the
FK program. Many of them went as follows:

Self-Important Writer: Why should I get my writing
below 8.5? That’s not even high school level.

Me: The grade level has nothing to do with academic
reading levels. That’s a popular myth.

Self-Important Writer: Still, I don’t want to dumb-
down my writing. I don’t want to write for people who
are too dumb to understand me.

Me: It’s not a question of dumb. It’s a question of
efficiency. If you write simply, then all your
readers, smart and dumb, can grasp your ideas more
easily.

Self-Important Writer: Let them work to understand me.
My thoughts are worth it.

Me (thinking): Maybe. Or maybe your thoughts are not
so good. And you want to disguise them with
complicated and confusing writing.

I do believe that. When the thinking is weak, the
writer senses it. Rather than expose its weakness to
the light of clarity, he obfuscates it with clumsy
expressions.

By the way, the Flesch-Kincaid grade level of this
rewritten article is now 6.6.

Is that amazing? Would you like to know how I did it?

My Top Techniques for Scoring 8.5 or Below

The most effective way to keep your writing good and
simple is to write about one – and only one – big idea
at a time. Figure out exactly what you want to say.
Stick to that and eliminate other, unrelated ideas,
even if you think they are interesting.

Whenever appropriate, introduce that idea with a
story. Stories have two advantages. First, they are
concrete, not abstract. That means they are usually
told with simple, active sentences. Such sentences get
low scores on the FK scale. They are quickly read and
easily comprehended.

The second advantage is that stories involve readers
emotionally. They make the reader care about the idea.
In my first effort at writing this piece, I started
academically, with an abstraction. Read it again and
you will see how abstract it seems. Unless you already
had a special knowledge of or interest in Flesch-
Kincaid, you probably wouldn’t want to read past the
first paragraph. In rewriting it, I began by
introducing Steve Sjuggerud as a successful writer and
telling his story. That made a big difference in the
sentences I used. It brought the score down from 10.2
to 7.8.

By sticking to one idea, it is much easier to avoid
complex sentences. Complex sentences are those that
are linked by coordinating conjunctions, such as
since, whereas, inasmuch as, notwithstanding,
therefore, etc. Complex sentences are not always bad,
but they are often unnecessary. When your thinking is
unclear, they are more likely to appear.

By starting with a story, I got my writing in the
active voice. Active sentences (“John kicked the
ball.”) score lower than passive sentences (“The ball
was kicked by John.”) They are easier to understand.
And they carry more emotional power.

To get my score even lower, I used my secret Kincaid
crusher – a technique I only recently discovered but
will happily share with you. I dealt with possible
objections to my thesis through dialog. Dialog, I’ve
found, generally has a very low FK grade. If it is
natural – i.e., the kind of speech that ordinary
people engage in – it will grade at 4.0 to 6.0. Using
dialog is not just a trick to fool the system. Like
storytelling, it makes an idea come to life in an
emotionally compelling way.

There are certainly other secrets to be discovered.
But if you employ any or all of these five, you will
see a quick and dramatic reduction in your FK grade.
Getting your grade down means bringing the clarity of
your writing up. Despite what the self-important
writers say, that’s a good thing.

My final FK score for this entire rewritten article:

     6.7

[Ed. Note: 
To “turn on” the FK program in Word, 
•  click Tools on the toolbar, 
•  then click Options, 
•  then click Spelling & Grammar, 
•  then select Check Grammar with Spelling, 
•  then select Show Readability Statistics, 
•  then click OK. 
Once you’ve done that, the FK score will be displayed
on your screen after you spell-check your document.]

-- 
